[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> No UFO history would be
complete without its own
mysteries and lore
of missing documents,
and probably the most famous
of these legendary missing
documents is The Estimate
of the Situation.
Now, we'll talk a
little bit about this.
Back in 1948, the whole UFO
mystery, these flying saucer
mystery, was still a very new
thing in the Western world
and actually worldwide.
People were learning
all about it.
In the summer of 1948, in July,
was a famous sighting by two
Eastern Airlines' pilots in
which they were flying over
a part of Alabama, confronted by
an object that was shaped like
an elongated cigar or rocket
that zoomed by their aircraft.
Scared them to
death, and they both
got a really good look at it.
Their descriptions were
identical to each other.
This particular sighting got the
attention of the United States
Air Force in a big way.
And at this time, there
was this new Project Sign
that was underway.
It was the predecessor
of Project Blue Book,
in which the US Air
Force had analysts
who were taking in
these UFO reports,
studying them, and trying to
understand what this really
was.
And the big question
back in those days
is, who's making these things?
It wasn't are they
make believe or real.
Everyone was assuming
these were real,
but the question is, were they
Russian, were they American,
or were they--
wait for it-- interplanetary?
That was the phrase that
people were using back then
for extraterrestrial,
and there was definitely
a number of scientists
in Project Sign that
believed that these objects
just might be interplanetary,
because they couldn't
figure out how
the Russians or the Americans
were able to create aircraft
that could move in
the incredible ways
that these so-called flying
saucers were being seen
to move.
So now, here comes the
Eastern Airlines' sighting,
and this was dramatic enough
that the team at Project Sign
wrote a report which they called
The Estimate of the Situation.
Now, the fact is
there are no existing
copies that we have of The
Estimate of the Situation.
I'll get to that
in just a second.
But what did they
apparently write?
Well, their estimate was
that this phenomenon was real
and that it was
interplanetary, and they
wrote a detailed
report indicating
that what it looked like was
that another group of beings,
people from outer space, were
surveilling planet Earth right
now for reasons unknown,
but that they were here.
And this goes up
the chain of command
all the way to the top of
the Air Force hierarchy.
Air Force Chief of
Staff Hoyt Vandenberg.
1948, this report lands on
his desk, whereby we are
told Vandenberg rejected it.
He said, give me another answer.
He ended up breaking
up the team,
dispersing the members
to different departments,
and that was the
end of Project Sign.
Now, why do we believe
this document exists when
we don't have a copy of it?
Well, Captain
Edward Ruppelt, who
ran Project Blue
Book in 1952 and '53,
stated in his own writings
that he personally
had seen The Estimate
and that he had read it.
One of his Air Force
colleagues, Major Dewey Fournet,
also claimed to
have seen and read
The Estimate of the Situation.
According to Ruppelt,
after Vandenberg
rejected this conclusion, he had
all copies burned and destroyed
in a manner that doesn't
appear to be standard Air Force
procedure for destroying
documents, by the way.
But this is what Ruppelt
told us in his book.
So what's the deal with The
Estimate of the Situation?
Did it really exist or not?
It seems to me, it's a better
bet than not that it did exist.
I think it probably did exist.
Ruppelt's talked
about this quite a bit
during the 1950s, and
one conversation with UFO
researcher, Donald Keyhoe,
he said, what were we
supposed to do with this?
What was the president
supposed to tell the public
when we ourselves
didn't really know
what their intentions were?
We don't know what the
intentions of these beings
happened to be?
So it was a very
upfront statement
that he was making
here, and it seems
to me that Ruppelt more likely
than not was telling the truth.
Particularly, when you have
another witness, Dewey Fournet,
who says the exact same thing.
By the way, Dewey Fournet,
in the late 1950s,
signed an affidavit
to the effect
of the existence of The
Estimate of the Situation.
So what you have
here is a situation
where this happens
time and again
in the early history of UFOs.
That is the United
States Air Force
has a group of people
studying this phenomenon,
and there's always this group
that concludes, wow, it's real,
and it doesn't seem
to belong to us,
and it doesn't seem to
belong to the Russians.
This happened again and again,
and it happened in 1948 early
on.
Public had no idea.
No one was telling the ordinary
folks on the street about this.
I think they would
have liked to know.
I think people in the academic
world would have liked to know.
I think people in the political
I think a lot of folks
would have liked to know,
but no one was told about this.
It did come out
a few years later
in Ruppelt's book in the
50s, but again, UFO book.
A few people read it.
Most people didn't, and
it just kind of gets
pushed to the sidelines.
But think about the
implications of this.
You've got right out of
the gate in the 1940s
the first detailed
Air Force study
that we know of
that studied UFOs
appears to have concluded that
it was real and interplanetary.
So according to
Ruppelt, the estimate
stated that it looked like
aliens or extraterrestrials
were visiting the Earth.
They were surveilling
the Earth in some way,
that it did not appear that
an attack was imminent,
but that the Air
Force and the military
really should have more time
to analyze the situation
and figure out
what was going on.
This sort of thing.
And then he said that
all but a few copies
were ordered to be destroyed
and particularly burned.
This is according to General
Vandenberg's directive
apparently.
That, by the way, is
not Air Force procedure
to destroy the documents
in that particular manner.
So we don't really
know what happened,
but this is what
Ruppelt has told us.
Now, what we do
know is as a result
of this decision by Vandenberg
to reject the conclusions
that the extraterrestrial
hypothesis went very much
out of favor within
the Air Force.
In other words, the explanation
that these flying saucers could
be from another
planet, that went away,
and it became very, very clear
that if anyone within the Air
Force or within the US
military for that matter
were going to start talking
about these so-called flying
saucers, better
not talk about them
as if they were interplanetary
or extraterrestrial.
That's right out.
No longer acceptable.
Not that it really ever was,
but this made it very clear.
You do not go there.
And what that really
meant ever after was
at any time you get a study by
the US military on these flying
saucers, all the analysts are
doing these mental gymnastics
to avoid the obvious
conclusion that someone
not of our civilization
is behind this phenomenon.
They had to go through
every single other type
of explanation before they ever
get to the obvious one, which
they would never get
to because they're not
allowed to go there.
So the rejection by
Vandenberg of The Estimate
of the Situation really
formally resulted
in this institutionalized
self-deception on UFOs
within the Air Force.
And therefore, really for
the rest of the US society
and really the
rest of the world.
This was where the
decision really
crystallized right there.
And incidentally,
in the aftermath
of The Estimate
of the Situation,
there was another study
done on the UFO situation.
This was prepared by US
Air Force Intelligence,
and it was called
Analysis of Flying Object
Incidents in the United States.
Sometimes nicknamed The Ghost
of the Estimate, because it's
considered to be a watered-down
version of The Estimate
of the Situation.
But really, they're
totally separate documents.
What you have is
a long situation
following Vandenberg's
rejection of the conclusions
of the true estimate of the
situation in which talking
about UFOs as interplanetary
was absolutely off limits.
My take on this ultimately is
that what Vandenberg was doing
was reacting a little
bit out of fear
that the lower levels
of the Air Force
were stirring the pot just
a little bit too much.
And I think what he's saying
to them is, you cool it.
I don't need you to be
involved in this answer.
We already know
what this is about.
I don't think these
analysts at Project Sign
were ever meant to get to
the truth on this phenomenon.
That's my own opinion.
I think what it was
about was more busy work
than anything else.
And when they get too
close, break them up
and have them move
on to other things.
[MUSIC PLAYING]